14/10/25
## Conditional probability

$A$ and $B$ are independent if $P(A|B) = P(A)$
Alternatively:
$$
\begin{align*}
P(A|B)&= \frac{P(A \cap B)}{P(B)} = P(A) \\
&= P(A \cap B) = P(A) \cdot P(B)

\end{align*}
$$
If $A$ and $B$ are independent, so are $A'$ and $B'$

Proof:
$$
\begin{gather*}
\text{Want to show:} \\
P(A' \cap B') = P(A') \cdot P(B') \\
\end{gather*}
$$
$$
\begin{align*}
P(A' \cap B') &= P((A \cap B)') \\
&= 1-P(A \cap B) \\
\end{align*}
$$
## Multiplication rule of conditional probability

$$
P(A \cap B) = P(A)P(B|A)
$$
This works if A and B are reversed on the left hand side.

## Total probability formula

ex.
Suppose that in our world there are only three phone manufacturing companies: A Pale, B Sung and C Windows, and their market shares are respectively 30, 40 and 30 percent. Suppose also that respectively 5, 8, and 10 percent of their phones become faulty within one year. If I buy a phone randomly (ignoring the manufacturer), what is the probability that my phone will develop a fault within one year? After finding the probability, suppose that my phone developed a fault in the first year — what is the probability that it was made by A Pale?


| Company   | Market Share | Percent defective |
| --------- | ------------ | ----------------- |
| A Pale    | 30%          | 5%                |
| B Sung    | 40%          | 8%                |
| C Windows | 30%          | 10%               |
To answer this type of question ,we derive the two most useful results in probability theory, the total probability formula and Baye's theorem. First, we derive the total probability formula,
Let $B_1, B_2, \dots, B_k$ be a set of mutually exclusive, i.e.
$$
B_i \cup B_j = \emptyset, \text{ for all } 1 \leq i \neq j \leq k
$$
and exhaustive events, i.e
$$
B_1 \cup B_2 \cup \dots \cup B_k = S
$$
Now any event $A$ can be represented by
$$
A = A \cap S = (A \cap B_1) \cup (A \cap B_2) \cup \dots \cup (A \cap B_k)
$$
where $(A \cap B_1) \cup (A \cap B_2) \cup \dots \cup (A \cap B_k)$ are mutually exclusive events. This gives:
$$
\begin{align}
P(A) &= P(A \cap B_1) + P(A \cap B_2) + \dots + P(A \cap B_k) \\
&= P(B_1)P(A|B_1) + P(B_2)P(A|B_2) + \dots + P(B_k)P(A|B_k)
\end{align}
$$
Now, we can apply this to the phones by doing:
$$
\begin{align}
P(A) &= P(B_1)P(A|B_1) + P(B_2)P(A|B_2) + \dots + P(B_k)P(A|B_k) \\
&= 0.30 \times 0.05 + 0.40 \times 0.08 + 0.3 \times 0.10 \\
&= 0.077
\end{align}
$$
Where $P(A)$ is the probability of developing a fault within a year.

## Baye's theorem

Let $A$ and $B$ be events, then:
$$
P(B|A) = \frac{P(B) \cdot P(A|B)}{P(A)}
$$
The probability $P(B | A)$ is called the posterior probability of $B$ given $A$ and $P(B)$ is called the prior probability.
Baye's theorem is the rule that converts the prior probability into the posterior probability by using the additional information that some other event ($A$) has already occurred.

ex. In the phone example, the probability that the faulty phone was produced by A Pale is:
$$
P(B_1|A) = \frac{P(B_1)P(A|B_1)}{P(A)} = \frac{0.30 \times 0.06}{0.077} = 0.1948
$$




