date

## Combinatorics to find probabilities

If all outcomes are equally likely, we can find the probability of an event by counting how many outcomes are in the event and dividing by the total number of possible outcomes.

For an experiment with $N$ equally liekly outcomes, each outcome has a probability $\frac{1}{N}$ 

For any event $A$,
$$
P(A) = \frac{\text{number of outcomes in } A}{\text{total number of possible outcomes of the experiment}}
$$
So, to calculate the probability of an event, we just count the number of outcomes in the event and total number of possible outcomes. 
## Multiplication rule of counting

Suppose you have to complete $k$ tasks in sequence. If there are $n_i$ ways to do the $i$th task, then there are $n_1 \times n_2 \times \dots \ times n_i$ ways to do all $k$ tasks.

## The number of permutations of $k$ from $n: P(n, k)$
Suppose we want to select $k$ people from $n$ and arrange them in $k$ different chairs. 
Think of the $i$th task as choosing who sits in the $i$th chair. By the multiplication rule, there are $n(n-1) \dots (n-[k-1])$ ways.
This number is called the number of permutations of $k$ from $n$, written $P(n, k)$:
$$
P(n,k) = n(n-1) \dots (n-[k-1])
$$
When $k=n$, $P(n,n) = n!$. By definition, $0! = 1$. We can also write:
$$
P(n,k) = \frac{n!}{(n-k)!}
$$
## The number of combinations of $k$ from $n: \pmatrix{n \\ k}$
Now suppose we want to select $k$ people from $n$ but we do not care about the order, how many ways can we do this? This is called a combination, written $\pmatrix{n \\ k}$.
To see this, recall that arranging $k$ people in $k$ chairs is $P(n, k)$ ways, but for each group of $k$ people, there are $k!$ ways to arrange them so,
$$
\pmatrix{n \\ k} = \frac{P(n,k)}{k!} = \frac{n!}{(n-k)k!}
$$

