
## Standard discrete distributions

### Bernoulli distribution

Bernoulli trials are independent trials with two outcomes, success or failure and a common success probability.

Suppose that we conduct one Bernoulli trial, where we get a success (S) or failure (F) with probabilities $P\{S\} = p$ and $P\{F\} = 1 - p$. Let $X$ be an indicator of success:
$$
X = 
\begin{cases}
1 &\text{if } S \\
0 &\text{if } F
\end{cases}
$$
Then $X$ has Bernoulli distribution with parameter p, written as $X ~ Bernoulli(p)$

The Bernoulli distribution has pmf
$$
f(x) = p^x(1-p)^{1-x}, x = 0,1
$$
hence,
$$
\begin{gather*}
E(X) = 0 \cdot(1-p) + 1p = p \\
E(X^2) = 0^2 \cdot(1-p) + 1^2p = p
\end{gather*}
$$
Therefore, 
$$
Var(X) = E(X^2) - (E(X))^2 = p - p^2 = p(1-p)
$$

### Binomial distribution

In $n$ independent Bernoulli trials with success probability $p$, let $X$ be the number of successes, then X~Bin(n, p)

An outcome of the experiment is represented by a sequence of S and Fs (SSSS, SSFS, SSFF, ect.) that comprises of $x$ S' and $n-x$ F's. The probability associated with this outcome is

$$
\begin{align*}
P\{SS \dots FS \dots SF\} 
&= pp \dots (1−p)p \dots p(1−p)  \\
&= p^x(1−p)^{n−x }
\end{align*}
$$
For this sequence, $X = x$, but there are many other sequences which also give $X = x$, there are $\pmatrix{n \\ x}$ such sequences. Hence, 
$$
P(X=x) = \pmatrix{n \\ x} p^x(1-p)^{n-x}
$$

This is the pmf of the binomial distribution with parameters $n$ and $p$.

#### Binomial theorem

For any positive integer $n$ and real numbers $a$ and $b$,

$$
(a + b)^n = b^n + \pmatrix{n \\ 1}ab^{n-1} + \dots + \pmatrix{n \\ x}a^xb^{n-x} + \dots + a^n
$$

Setting $a = p$ and $b = 1$ in the binomial theorem shows that $\sum^n_{x = 0}\pmatrix{n \\ x}p^x(1-p)^{n-x} = 1$

ex.

Suppose that widgets are manufactured in a mass production process with 1% defective.
The widgets are packaged in bags of 10 with a money-back guarantee if more than 1 widget per bag is defective. For what proportion of bags would the company have to provide a refund?

First, we find the probability that a randomly selected bag has at most 1 defective widget. Let X be the number of defective widgets in a bag, then $X∼Bin(n= 10,p= 0.01)$. So this probability is equal to:
$$
P(X = 0) + P(X = 1)= (0.99)^{10} + 10(0.01)^1(0.99)^9 = 0.9957
$$

$1-0.9957 = 0.0043$ which means just over 4 in 1000 bags will need to be refunded.

<u>Note:</u>
A binomial random variable can also be described using the urn model. Suppose we have an urn (population) containing $N$ individuals, a proportion $p$ of which are of type $S$ and a proportion $1−p$ of type $F$. 
If we select a sample of $n$ individuals at random with replacement, then the number, $X$, of type $S$ individuals in the sample follows the binomial distribution with parameters $n$ and $p$.

#### Using R to calculate probabilities

For binomial distribution,
```R
dbinom(x=3, size=5, prob=0.34)
```
Calculates the pmf of $Bin(n = 5, p = 0.34)$ at $x=3$ with value $P(X=3) = \pmatrix{5 \\ 3}(0.34)^3(1-0.34)^{5-3}$

To get the cdf (probability up to and including the argument), the following can be used,
```R
pbinom(q=3, size=5, prob=0.34)
```
This will return the value of $P(X \leq 3)$ when $X ~ Bin(n = 5, p = 0.34)$. 

#### Expectation of a binomial 

Let $X ~ Bin(n, p)$. We have,
$$
E(X) = \sum^n_{x = 0}xP(X= x) = \sum^n_{x=0}x\pmatrix{n \\ x}p^x(1-p)^{n-x}
$$
From this, we can prove that $E(X) = np$,
$$
\begin{align}
E(X)
&= \sum^n_{x=0}x\pmatrix{n \\ x}p^x(1-p)^{n-x} \\
&= \sum^n_{x=0} x\frac{n!}{x!(n - x)!}p^x(1-p)^{n-x} \\
&= \sum^n_{x=0} \frac{n!}{(x-1)!(n-x)}p^x(1-p)^{n-x} \\
&= np \sum^n_{x=0} \frac{(n-1)!}{(x-1)!(n-1-x+1)!}p^{x-1}(1-p)^{n-1-x+1} \\
&= np \sum^n_{x=0} \frac{(n-1)!}{y!(n-1-y)!}p^y(1-p)^{1-n}
\end{align}
$$