02/02/26

## Group tables

The group table of a finite group $G = \{a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n\}$ is a table that looks like:
$$
\begin{array}{c|ccc}
* & \dots & a_j & \dots \\
\hline
\vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\
a_i & \dots & a_i * a_j & \dots \\
\vdots & & \vdots
\end{array}
$$

This is a table whose $(i,j)$ entry is $a_i * a_j$

The trivial group is the group with one element. For example $e$ would have the group table:
$$
\begin{array}{c|c}
* & e \\
\hline
e & e
\end{array}
$$
A group with 3 elements ($e, a, b$ in this example) would have a group table:
$$
\begin{array}{c|ccc}
* & e & a & b \\
\hline
e & e & a & b \\
a & a & b & e \\
b & b & e & a
\end{array}
$$
(Also note that this means $a * b = a$ and therefore implying $b = e$)

These tables satisfy the "sudoku rules" because of rule 2:
For $a, b \in G$ there is a unique solution to $x * a = b$ and $x * y = b$. This means that if something has appeared once in a row or column it cannot appear again.

## The cyclic group of order m

Imagine you are doing maths with time, if the time is half past and you add 40 minutes, the minutes is pointing at 10. This is because once the minutes value reaches 60 it resets.

This is a cyclic group of order 61.

Let $m \in \mathbb{N}$ and define $C_m := \{\overline 0, \overline 1, \dots, \overline{m - 1}\}$

Define a binary operation on the set $C_m$ by:
$$
\overline x \oplus \overline y := 
\begin{cases}
\overline{x + y}  & \text{if } x + y < m\\
\overline{x + y - m} & \text{if } x + y \geq m
\end{cases}
$$
If the sum is less than $m$, then no need to change anything, however if it is larger than $m$, subtract $m$ to make it cyclic.

Note that it cycles back to 0 once $x + y$ is $m$ or larger, so the minutes example is order 61 rather than 60.

ex.


$$
\begin{array}{c|cc}
\oplus & \overline 0 & \overline 1 \\
\hline
\overline 0 & \overline 0 & \overline 1 \\
\overline 1 & \overline 1 & \overline 0
\end{array}
$$
