29/01/26

Gaussian elimination doesn't always give a single solution, it could give 0 solutions or infinite solutions.

## Cartesian product of sets

The cartesian product of two sets is the set of ordered pairs. For example if $G, H$ are sets,
$$
G \times H = \{(g,h): g \in G, h \in H\}
$$
In english $G \times H$ is a set which contains all of the combinations of pairs you can make with the items in each set.

e.g
$$
\begin{gather*}
G = \{0,1\}, H = \{1,2\} \\
G \times H = \{(0,1), (0,2), (1,1), (1,2)\}
\end{gather*}
$$
or,
$$
\mathbb{R}^2 = \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} = \{(x,y): x \in \mathbb{R}, y \in \mathbb{R}\}
$$

## Binary operations

A binary operation on a set $G$ is a function $G \times G \to G$. 
We write $a * b$ (or $ab$, or $a \cdot b$, or $a + b$) for the image of the pair $(a,b) \in G \times G$ in $G$ under this function.

This is a just an arbitrary way of combining elements in $G$, via a binary operation. We can think of the "image" meaning the output of a function, so this just means that we are writing the output of a specific operation on $a$ and $b$.

In other words, take two elements in $G$, and make another element that is also in $G$ through some arbitrary operation.

## Groups

A group is a set $G$ together with a binary operation $G \times G \to G, (a,b) \mapsto a * b$ (which is referred to as the group operation or group multiplication) such that the following axioms are satisfied:
1. Associativity: For all $a, b, c \in G$ we have $(a * b) * c = a * (b * c) \in G$
2. Existence of the identity/neutral element: There exists $e \in G$ such that for all $a \in G$ we have $e * a = a = a * e$
3. Existence of the right inverse: For every $a \in G$ there exists $b \in G$ such that $a * b = e$

$e$ can be called a "do nothing" element. For example in addition $0$ would be $e$, as $a + 0 = a = 0 + a$

* A group is called abelian/commutative if for all $a, b \in G$ we have $a * b = b * a$ (the whole group is commutative)

* A group is called finite if $G$ has finitely many elements. In this case its cardinality $|G|$ is called the order of $G$