20/10/25

## What is the derivative?

Start with a function $f$ and a point $x$ in the interior of the domain of $f$ (ie. $x$ is not an endpoint). Consider $f(x)$ on the graph of $f$. We want to find the tangent line to the graph of $f$ at $x$.

To find the equation of a line, we need one point and its gradient at that point. We have one point, $(x, f(x))$. Now, we need to find the gradient.

The idea is to find the gradient through a series of approximations. Pick a point $x + h$ close to $x$. To simplify the argument, suppose $h > 0$. The line connecting $(x, f(x))$ and $(x+ h, f(x + h))$ is called the secant line.

This secant line approximates the tangent line. The advantage of the secant line is that its gradient is easy to calculate since we know two points on the line. The slope of the secant line is:
$$
\frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{(x + h) - h} = \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h}
$$
If $h$ is made smaller, then we get a new secant line which should be a better approximation to the tangent line.

As these approximations to the tangent line improve the smaller $h$ gets, we take the limit as $h$ approaches 0 in order to get the tangent.
The gradient of the tangent line of the graph of $f$ at $x$ should be:
$$
\lim_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h}
$$
This is used as the definition of the derivative of $f$ at $x$.

<u>Note</u>
- A function $f$ is said to be differentiable at $x$ if and only if that equation exists. If it does exist, then it is written as $f'(x)$.
- A function $f$ is differentiable on a subset $S$ of the real numbers if it is differentiable on every point $x$ in $S$.

ex.
Find the derivative of $f(x) = x^2$

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{(x + h)^2 - x^2}{h} &= \frac{(x^2 + 2xh + h^2) - x^2}{h}\\
&= \frac{2xh + h^2}{h} \\
&= 2x + h \\
\text{Apply the limit:} \\
&= 2x \\
\end{align}
$$
$$
f(x) = x^2,\ f'(x) = 2x
$$
ex 2.
Find the derivative of $f(x) = \sqrt{x}$ when it exists.
- First, we must observe that the domain of $f(x) = \sqrt{x}$ is $[0, \infty)$.

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{\sqrt{x + h} - \sqrt{x}}{h} &= \frac{\sqrt{x + h} - \sqrt{x}}{h} \cdot \frac{\sqrt{x+h} + \sqrt{x}}{\sqrt{x+h} + \sqrt{x}} \\
&= \frac{(x + h) - x}{h \cdot (\sqrt{x+h} + \sqrt{x})} \\
&= \frac{h}{h \cdot (\sqrt{x+h} + \sqrt{x})} \\
&= \frac{1}{\sqrt{x+h} + \sqrt{x}}
\end{align}
$$
Therefore,
$$
\begin{align}
\lim_{h \to 0}\frac{1}{\sqrt{x+h} + \sqrt{x}} &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{x} + \sqrt{x}} \\
&=\frac{1}{2\sqrt{x}}
\end{align}
$$
$f(x) = \sqrt{x}$ is differentiable for $x \in (0, \infty)$ and at any such $x$ the derivative is $f'(x) = \frac{1}{2\sqrt{x}}$.

## Differentiability vs. Continuity

A differentiable function has to be continuous, but a continuous function doe snot have to be differentiable.

<u>Proof</u>
Consider the absolute value function $f(x) = |x|$.

Using the definition of continuity, we can see that $f$ is continuous on $\mathbb{R}$, and matches the geometric intuition of being able to draw the graph of $f$ without lifting your pencil off the page.

Now consider the differentiability of $f$. If $x > 0$ then $f(x) = x$. It's easy to check using the definition of the derivative that $f(x)$ is differentiable on $(0, \infty)$ and $f'(x) = 1$. Geometrically, this makes sense since the tangent line to a line is the same line, and the slope of $f(x) = x$ is 1. 

Similarly if $x < 0$ then $f(x) = -x$ nad this is differentiable on $(-\infty, 0)$, although now the slop of the tangent line is -1. However, at $x= 0$ something different happens. We have just seen that:
$$
\lim_{h \to 0^+}\frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = 1
$$
However,
$$
\lim_{h \to 0^-}\frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = -1
$$ for $f(x) = |x|$. Therefore $\lim_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h}$ does not exist. Hence, $f$ is not differentiable at $x = 0$ in the graph of $f$, where the gradient of the tangent line has to change abruptly.

We conclude that the function $f(x) = |x|$ is continuous on $\mathbb{R}$ but not differentiable on $\mathbb{R}$. More precisely, $f$ is continuous on $\mathbb{R}$, and differentiable on only $\mathbb{R} - \{0\}$.

If $f$ is differentiable at $x$, then $f$ is continuous at $x$.
$$
f'(x) = \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h}
$$
So we get,
$$
\begin{align}
f(x + h) - f(x) &= \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} \cdot h \\
\lim_{h \to 0}(f(x + h) - f(x))&= \lim_{h\to 0}
\end{align}
$$