05/11/25

## Concavity and Inflection Points

The second derivative will say something about whether the graph of $f$ is cupped upwards or cupped downwards.

Let $f$ be a differentiable function on an open interval $I$
- The graph of $f$ is concave up on $I$ if $f'$ is increasing on $I$
- The graph of $f$ is concave down on $I$ if $f'$ is decreasing on $I$

Remember that the derivative $f'(x)$ is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of $f$ at $x$. If $f'$ is increasing it means that as $x$ increases, the slope of the tangent lines of $f$ are increasing.

Graphically, a function is concave up if the tangent lines are below the graph, and concave down if the tangent lines are above the graph of $f$.

A point $x_0$ is an inflection point of $f$ if the graph of $f$ has a tangent line at $x_0$ and the concavity of $f$ is opposite on opposite sides of $x_0$

Let $f$ be a function which is twice differentiable on an open interval $I$
1. If $f''(x) > 0$ on $I$ then $f$ is concave up on $I$
2. If $f''(x) < 0$ on $I$ then $f$ is concave down on $I$
3. If $f$ has an inflection point at $x_0$, then $f''(x_0) = 0$

The third case does not work in reverse. This is because it may be a local maximum or minimum, or a point which is not differentiable which means it is not a point of inflection.

<u>Proof</u>
Let $g = f'$, so $g' = f''$.
To say $g'(x) > 0$ on $I$ means $g$ is increasing on $I$, that is $f'$ is increasing on $I$. So by definition $f$ is concave up on $I$. 
Similarly, to say $g'(x) < 0$ on $I$ means $g$ is decreasing on $I$, so. $f'$ is decreasing on $I$. By definition, $f$ is concave down on $I$.

If $f$ has an inflection point at $x_0$ then the concavity of $f$ changes from the left to the right of $x_0$. For example if $f$ is concave up to the left of $x_0$ and concave down to the right of of $x_0$ then by rules 1 and 2, $f''(x) > 0$ on the left of $x_0$ and $f''(x) < 0$ on the right of $x_0$. This means that we must have $f''(x_0) = 0$ by Intermediate Value Theorem. The same occurs vice versa if $f$ is concave down on the left of $x_0$ and concave up on the right of $x_0$.

ex.
Find the intervals of concavity and the inflection points of $f(x) = x^6 - 10x^4$.

$$
\begin{align}
f'(x) &= 6x^5 - 40x^3 \\
f''(x) &= 30x^4 - 12x^2 \\
&= 30x^2(x^2 - 4) \\
\end{align}
$$
$$
\begin{gather}
f''(x) = 0 \implies x = 0, x = \pm 2
\end{gather}
$$

|       | $(-\infty, -2)$ | $(-2, 0)$ | $(0, 2)$  | $(2, \infty)$ |
| ----- | --------------- | --------- | --------- | ------------- |
| $f''$ | $+$             | $-$       | $-$       | $+$           |
| $f$   | $\bigcup$       | $\bigcap$ | $\bigcap$ | $\bigcup$     |
Here in the case of intervals of increase and decrease, we simply test $f''$ at one point in each interval and only record the sign.
We find that $f$ is concave up on $(-\infty, -2)$, concave down on $(-2, 2)$ and concave up on $(2, \infty)$ The change in concavity at $x = -2$ and $x = 2$ implies both of these points are inflection points. However, there is no change in concavity at $x = 0$ so that is not an inflection point.

## Testing critical points

Suppose that $f'(c) = 0$ and $f''(c)$ exists:
- If $f''(x) > 0$ then $f$ is a local minimum
- If $f''(x) < 0$ then $f$ is a local maximum
- If $f''(x) =>= 0$ then more information is needed to classify the critical point.

A positive second derivative suggests that the function has a local minimum. This is because as $f'(c) = 0$, the tangent line is horizontal. Because $f''(c) > 0$, the graph is concave up, meaning on the right of $c$, the graph will begin to move up, so it can only be a minimum.
