11/11/25
## Antiderivatives

The idea is simple, given a function $f$, find another function $g$ such that $g' = f$. The formal definition is:

Let $f$ be a function. A function $g$ is an antiderivative of $f$ if $g$ is differentiable and $g' = f$

ex.
For example, since $\frac{d}{dx}(x^n) = nx^{n-1}$, an antiderivative of $x^{n-1}$ is $\frac{1}{n}x^n$. By linearality, we can find antiderivatives and polynomials.

Suppose that $g(x)$ is an antiderivative of $f(x)$, and $c$ is a constant. Let $h(x)$ be a new function defined by $h(x) = g(x) + c$. Then $h$ is also an antiderivative of $f$.

<u>Proof:</u>
Since $g$ is an antiderivative of $f$, we have $g'(x) = f(x)$. To show that $h$ is an antiderivative of $f$, we need to show that $h'(x) = f(x)$ as well. We have $h'(x) = (g(x) + c)' = g'(x) = f(x)$ since the derivative of a constant is 0.

This means that antiderivatives are not unique and antiderivatives have no geometric meaning but can be used to find integrals.

## The definite integral

Let $f$ be a continuous function and consider its graph. We want to find the area under the curve between $x = a$ and $x = b$.

To approximate this area, we can use rectangles. Using the formula $A = b \times h$, we can fit a sequence of rectangles below the curve, with one corner of the rectangle touching the curve with area $L$. Because the rectangles are below the curve, $L \leq A$. 
We can also have rectangles above the curve which also touch the curve at one corner with area $U$. Because the are above the curve, $U \geq A$.

<u>Step 1:</u>
Divide $[a,b]$ into $n$ segments $[1, x_1], [x_1, x_2], \dots, [x_{n-2}, x_{n-1}], [x_{n-1}, b]$ where $a < x_1 < x_2 < \dots < x_{n-1} < b$
To align the notation, let $x_0 = a$ and $x_n = b$. Let $\ell_i$ be the length of segment $[x_{i-1}, x_i]$

<u>Step 2:</u>
Consider $f$ restricted to $[x_{i-1}, x_i]$. On that closed interval, $f$ is continuous so it has a maximum and minimum value (EVT).
Let $M_i$ be the maximum value and $m_i$ be the minimum value.

<u>Step 3:</u>
Form rectangles over $[x_{i-1}, x_i]$. The lower rectangle has base $\ell_i$ and height $m_i$. Its area is $\ell_i \cdot m_i$
The upper rectangle has a base $\ell_i$ and height $M_i$ which has an area of $\ell_i \cdot M_i$.

<u>Step 4:</u>
Add up the areas of the lower and upper rectangles. The sum of the lower rectangles is:
$$
\begin{align}
L(f, P) &= \ell_1 m_1 + \dots + \ell_n m_n \\
&=\sum^n_{i = 1} \ell_i m_i
\end{align}
$$

Where $P$ is the partition (how $[a,b]$ was divided into $n$ segments)
Now, the sum of the upper rectangles is:
$$
U(f, P) = \sum^n_{i = 1}\ell_i M_i
$$
Therefore the area between the graph of $f$ and the $x$-axis that lies over $[a,b]$ satisfies
$$
L(f, P) \leq A \leq U(f, P)
$$

If the intervals are made smaller then there's less overcounted area between $A$ and the total area of the upper rectangles, and less undercounted area between $A$ and the lower rectangles. This should continue to improve as the interval lengths get smaller. So in the limit we should get an accurate approximation to $A$.

This limiting process is what is meant by the definite integral

Let $f$ be a continuous function on the interval $[a,b]$. The definite integral of $f$ from $a$ to $b$ is the unique number $I$ such that $L(f, P) \leq I \leq U(f, P)$ for all partitions of $[a, b]$. We write this as:
$$
I = \int^b_a f(x) dx
$$
