29/01/26

## Simplex Method

Example problem:

| Food | Carbs | Protein | Vitamins |
| ---- | ----- | ------- | -------- |
| Eggs | 20    | 90      | 0.02     |
| Ham  | 10    | 200     | 0.5      |
Sam can only buy eggs ($1 each) and ham ($10 each).

Every day sam needs carbs (300g), protein (600g), and vitamins (1g).

*Decision:* How much of each to buy
*Objective:* Minimise cost
*Constraints* Get enough nutrition

<u>Decision variables</u>
The variables which we can control
$$
x_E, x_H \geq 0
$$
This is where $x_E$ represents the number of eggs and $x_H$ represents the number of ham.

In this example, we can only change the number of eggs and ham being bought, not the price of them or the nutrients we get from them.

<u>Objective function</u>
Lets us know what we are trying to optimise
$$
\text{min}_x \text{ cost} = 1x_E + 10x_H
$$

(Minimise the cost with eggs = 1 and ham = 10)

<u>Constraints</u>
The function which decides the rules for the optimisation
$$
\begin{matrix}
&\text{min} &1 &x_E &+ &10 &x_h \\
&\text{subject to} &20 &x_E &+ &10 &x_h &\geq & 300 \\
& &90 &x_E &+ &200 &x_h &\geq & 600 \\
& &0.02 &x_E &+ &0.5 &x_h &\geq & 1 \\
& & &x_E, & & &x_h &\geq & 0 \\
\end{matrix}
$$
A compact form of what is being said in the problem.
Note the bottom means we can't minimise by buying negative items
### General form

$$
\begin{matrix}
&\text{min} &\sum^n_{j = 1} &c_j\ x_j \\
&\text{subject to} &\sum_n^{j = 1} &a_{ij} &x_j \geq b_i,\  \forall i \in \{1, \dots, m\} \\
& & & &x_j \geq 0,\  \forall j \in \{1, \dots, n\} \\
\end{matrix}
$$

$$
\begin{matrix}
&\text{[min|max]} &f(x) \\
&\text{subject to} &g_1(x) &[\geq | \leq | =]_1\ &b_1 \\
& &\vdots &\vdots &\vdots \\
& &g_m(x) &[\geq | \leq | =]_m &b_m \\
\end{matrix}
$$
$$
x \in X \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n
$$
## Optima

In mathematical programming, there may be more than one solution. There could be one solution locally which is in a certain range, however there could also be global solutions which are further away which are better solutions.  These are called the global optima.

## Optimal portfolio problem

There are two assets, $A$ and $B$ with different returns.
The goal is to diversify investments to hedge risk. (Limit potential losses)

* Expected returns from $A$ are $2\%$
* Expected returns from $B$ are $3\%$
* Total to invest $10$ units
* Invest at most $70\%$ of total in $A$ (safe) and $50\%$ of total in $B$ (risky)

