05/02/26

## Forms

### Canonical form

$$
\begin{matrix}
\text{max} &\sum^n_{j=1} &c_j &x_j \\
\text{s.t.} &\sum^n_{j=1} &a_{ij} &x_j &\leq &b_i, &\forall i \in \{1, m\} \\
& & &x_j &\geq &0, &\forall j \in \{1, n\}
\end{matrix}
$$

In this form, we can see that we are explicitly maximising an objective function (since the keyword max is used on the first line)

The objective function is subject to some constraints which are on the second line and beyond.

This form is useful for geometric interpretations of the problem because:
* The inequalities are used to form bounds
* We can see if its maximisation or minimisation easily (so we can decide if there is a solution for unbounded objective functions)

The inequalities may be a nuisance for some problems, so strict equalities may be more useful.

It is also easier for conversion to simplex with stack variables and creating basic feasible solutions.

### Standard form

$$
\begin{matrix}
\text{min} &\sum^n_{j=1} &c_j &x_j \\
\text{s.t.} &\sum^n_{j=1} &a_{ij} &x_j &= &b_i, &\forall i \in \{1, m\} \\
& & &x_j &\geq &0, &\forall j \in \{1, n\}
\end{matrix}
$$
This form is important because equalities are used instead of inequalities.

This allows us to use techniques from linear algebra to solve or invert problems.

It is also used for interior-point methods which require $Ax = b$

## Transformation rules

1. $\text{max } f(x) \longleftrightarrow -\text{min }(-f(x))$
	This is just flipping the objective function on the x and the y axis
2. $ax \leq b \longleftrightarrow -ax \geq -b$
3. $ax = b \longleftrightarrow$ $ax \geq b$ and $ax \leq b$
4. $ax \leq b \longleftrightarrow ax + s = b$, with $s \geq 0$
	Where $s$ is known as a slack variable which takes up whats left over in the equality
5. $x$ unrestricted:
$$
x \to x^+-x^- \text{ with } x^\pm \geq 0
$$
In english, pick a number, and pick a number thats larger and subtract a number thats smaller and you will get the number

ex.
$$
\begin{matrix}
\text{max} &9 &x_1 &- &3 &x_2 \\
\text{s.t} &8 & x_1 &+ &4 &x_2 & \leq &41 \\
&6 & x_1 &- &2 &x_2 & \geq &23 \\
& & x_1 & & & & \geq &0 \\
& & & & &x_2 &\text{unrestricted} & \\
\end{matrix}
$$
Now, we turn $x_2$ into $x_2^+ - x_2^-$ and we constrain it to $\geq 0$.

$$
\begin{matrix}
\text{max} &9 &x_1 &- &3 &x_2^+ &+ &3 &x_2^- \\
\text{s.t} &8 & x_1 &+ &4 &x_2^+ &- &4 &x_2^- & \leq &41 \\
&6 & x_1 &- &2 &x_2^+ &+ &2 &x_2^- & \geq &23 \\
& & x_1 & & &x_2^+ & & &x_2^-&\geq &0 \\
\end{matrix}
$$
Now, we introduce slack variables to turn the inequalities into equalities.
$$
\begin{matrix}
\text{max} &9 &x_1 &- &3 &x_2^+ &+ &3 &x_2^- \\
\text{s.t} &8 & x_1 &+ &4 &x_2^+ &- &4 &x_2^- &+ &s_1 & & &= &41 \\
&6 & x_1 &- &2 &x_2^+ &+ &2 &x_2^- & &  &- &s_2&= &23 \\
& & x_1 & & &x_2^+ & & &x_2^- & &s_1 & &s_2 &\geq &0 \\
\end{matrix}
$$

## Hyperplanes

Take one inequality $a_i x \leq b_i$
* Halfspace: points satisfying inequality
* Hyperplane: Points satisfying inequality as equation
* Vector $\vec a_i$:
   * Orthogonal (perpendicular) to hyperplane
   * Points out of hyperspace
   
Basically the halfspace is the region which satisfies the inequality, the hyperplane is an equation of points which satisfy the inequality, and the vector $\vec a_i$ is normal to the hyper plane pointing away from the halfspace.

We can think of the feasible region as being the intersection of $m$ halfspaces (also known as a polyhedron). 