## Eigenvalues and eigenvectors

Let $A$ be an $n \times n$ matrix.

A number $\lambda \in \mathbb{R}$ is said to be an eigenvalue of $A$ if there is a non-zero vector $\vec v \in \mathbb{R}^n$ such that $A \vec v = \lambda v$
	This means when you multiply $\vec v$ by $A$, the direction does not change, only the scale. The amount that it is scaled is called the eigenvalue.

Any non-zero vector $\vec u \in \mathbb{R}^n$ such that $A \vec u = \mu \vec u$ for some $\mu \in \mathbb{R}$ is called an eigenvector of $A$ with eigenvalue $\mu$

Geometrically, $\vec v \in \mathbb{R}^n$ is an eigenvector if $A$ stretches or shrinks it but preserves the line $L$ passing through $\vec v$

If the eigenvalue $\lambda$ is:
1. $\lambda > 1$ the vector is stretched
2. $0 < \lambda < 1$ the vector is shrunk
3. $\lambda = 0$ the vector collapses to $\vec 0$

### Finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a square matrix

Let $A$ be an $n \times n$ matrix. Then $\lambda \in \mathbb{R}$ is an eigenvalue of $A$ iff $det(A - \lambda I_n) = 0$

ex.

Find the eigenvalues of $A = \pmatrix{2 & 1 \\ 1 & 2}$

Start with forming the matrix $A - \lambda I_n$:
$$
A - \lambda I_2 = 
\begin{pmatrix}
2 & 1 \\ 
1 & 2
\end{pmatrix}
-
\lambda
\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0 \\
0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
=
\begin{pmatrix}
2 - \lambda & 1 \\
1 & 2 - \lambda
\end{pmatrix}
$$
Next, we get the determinant and set it equal to 0:
$$
det(A - \lambda I_2) = (2 - \lambda)(2-\lambda) = \lambda^2 -4 \lambda + 3
$$
Hence,
$$
\begin{gather*}
det(A - \lambda I_2) = \lambda^2 - 4 \lambda +3 = 0  \\
\lambda = 1 \text{ or } \lambda = 3
\end{gather*}
$$
### Characteristic polynomial

Let $A$ be a $n \times n$ matrix. The characteristic polynomial of $A$ is defined as $p_A(\lambda)$ which is equivalent to $det(A - \lambda I_n)$.

To find the eigenvalue, we need to compute the characteristic polynomial and then find its roots. If $A \in M_n(\mathbb{R})$, the characteristic polynomial of $A$ will have degree $n$, therefore $A$ cannot have more than $n$ eigenvalues.

### Finding eigenvalues

To find the eigenvalues of an $n \times n$ matrix $A$, form the new matrix $A - \lambda I_n$, calculate the characteristic polynomial $p_A(\lambda)$ as $det(A - \lambda I_n)$ and find the roots of the equation $p_A(\lambda)$ = 0. The roots will be the eigenvalues of $A$.

### Finding eigenvectors

If $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue of an $n \times n$ matrix $A$, to find an eigenvector $\vec v$ corresponding to this $\lambda$. Calculate a non-zero solution of the equation $(A - \lambda I_n) \vec v = \vec 0$.

ex.
Let $A = \pmatrix{2 & 1 \\ 1 & 2}$ . Find the eigenvectors of $A$ corresponding to $\lambda_1 = 1$ and $\lambda_2 = 3$.

$$
\begin{gather*}
\lambda_1 = 1 \\
A - \lambda_1 \cdot I_2 = \pmatrix{1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1} \\
\pmatrix{1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1} \pmatrix{x \\ y} = \pmatrix{0 \\ 0}
\end{gather*}
$$
Find the values of $x$ and $y$ and that is the eigenvector.
